# Matrices

## Properties

**Prove:** $\bold{(A^{-1})'}=\bold{(A')^{-1}}$

---
**Prove:** $\bold{(AB)'}=\bold{(B'A')}$

---
**Prove:** $\bold{(AB)^{-1}}=\bold{B^{-1}A^{-1}}$.

**Proof:**
$$
\begin{align*}
    \bold{(AB)(AB)^{-1}}&=\bold{I}\\
    \bold{A^{-1}(AB)(AB)^{-1}}&=\bold{A^{-1}I}\\
    \bold{(IB)(AB)^{-1}}&=\bold{A^{-1}I}\\
    \bold{B(AB)^{-1}}&=\bold{A^{-1}}\\
    \bold{B^{-1}B(AB)^{-1}}&=\bold{B^{-1}A^{-1}}\\
    \bold{(AB)^{-1}}&=\bold{B^{-1}A^{-1}}\\
\end{align*}
$$
**Note:** Existence of $\bold{(AB)^{-1}}$ does not imply that $\bold{B^{-1}}$ and $\bold{A^{-1}}$ exist.

---


**Prove:** $\mathbb{E}[\text{Tr}(\bold{X})]=\text{Tr}(\mathbb{E}[\bold{X}])$.
$$
\begin{align*}
    \text{Tr}(\bold{X})&=\sum_{i=1}^nx_{ii},\\
    \mathbb{E}[\text{Tr}(\bold{X})]&=\mathbb{E}[\sum_{i=1}^nx_{ii}],\\
    \mathbb{E}[\text{Tr}(\bold{X})]&=\sum_{i=1}^n\mathbb{E}[x_{ii}].\\
\end{align*}
$$
$\sum_{i=1}^n\mathbb{E}[x_{ii}]$ is equivalent to $\text{Tr}(\mathbb{E}[\bold{X}])$, therefore
$$
\begin{align*}
    \mathbb{E}[\text{Tr}(\bold{X})]&=\sum_{i=1}^n\mathbb{E}[x_{ii}]=\text{Tr}(\mathbb{E}[\bold{X}]).\hspace{15px}\blacksquare\\
\end{align*}
$$

## Rank of a Matrix

**Column Space:** The column space of a matrix is the vector space that is spanned by its column vectors.

For example
$$
\bold{A}=
\begin{bmatrix}
1 & 5 & 6\\
2 & 6 & 8\\
7 & 1 & 8
\end{bmatrix}
$$
here the third column is the sum of the first two hence the column space of this matrix is a two-dimensional subspace of $\mathbb{R}^3$.

**Column Rank:** The column rank of a matrix is the dimension of the vector space that is spanned by its column vectors. The column rank of the following matrix is $2$.
$$
\bold{A}=
\begin{bmatrix}
1 & 5 & 6\\
2 & 6 & 8\\
7 & 1 & 8
\end{bmatrix}
$$

**Row Rank:** The row rank of a matrix is the dimension of the vector space that is spanned by its row vectors. The row rank of the following matrix is $3$.
$$
\bold{B}=
\begin{bmatrix}
1 & 2 & 3\\
5 & 1 & 5\\
6 & 4 & 5\\
3 & 1 & 4
\end{bmatrix}
$$
The notation of row rank of matrix $\bold{B}$ is: $\text{rank }\bold{B'}$

**Theorem:** The **column rank** and **row rank** of a matrix are equal.

Column rank = Row rank = Rank of the matrix. That is
$$
\text{rank }\bold{A}=\text{rank }\bold{A'}
$$

**Full column rank:** If the column rank of a matrix happens to equal the number of columns it contains, then the matrix is said to have full column rank.

**Full row rank:** If the row rank of a matrix happens to equal the number of rows it contains, then the matrix is said to have full row rank.

**Property:**
$$
\text{rank }\bold{A}\leq\min(\text{number of rows, number of columns})
$$