# Synthetic Control

## Assignment

Dear all, I hope this e-mail finds you well!



As I mentioned during classes, the final exam will consist of a discussion paper starting from an article you selected. See below some more details and deadlines.



By December 17, 2023 each of you should send me by e-mail the title of the article (or articles) on which you are planning to focus. Feel free to choose from papers you are interested in. The important thing is that the topics are in line with those of the course. NOTE: each of you should focus on a different article and work autonomously.



By January 21, 2024 you should send me by e-mail the pdf of your discussion paper. The length must be at most 8 pages (excluding references) and the article must be written using the NeurIPS 2023 template that can be found on Overleaf. The paper should be organized approximately as follows:



**Section 1 [Literature review]** Should present and discuss the broader framework to which your selected article is contributing.  
**Section 2 [Article presentation]** Should summarize in a self-contained and clear way your selected article and its main contributions.  
**Section 3 [Future directions]** Should contain an attempt of your own contribution. This can be a proposal for future extensions, or a well-supported criticism to some results in the paper, or an application of the methods to some relevant problems, etc… 


NOTE: The evaluation will also consider the quality of writing.



If you have any additional question or would like suggestions on interesting papers, feel free to write me. 

I look forward to reading your discussion papers!

## Introduction

## Literature review

## Detailed description of Synthetic Control

### What is Synthetic Control Method

## Future directions
